Rewrote the .NET Aspire Azure AI Search doc (#2766)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/azureai/azureai-search-document-integration.md

---
title: .NET Aspire Azure AI Search integration
description: Learn how to integrate Azure AI Search with .NET Aspire.
ms.date: 03/05/2025
---

# .NET Aspire Azure AI Search integration

[!INCLUDE [includes-hosting-and-client](../includes/includes-hosting-and-client.md)]

> [Azure AI Search](/azure/search/search-what-is-azure-search) (formerly Azure Cognitive Search) is an enterprise-ready information retrieval system for your heterogeneous content that you ingest into a search index, and surface to users through queries and apps. It comes with a comprehensive set of advanced search technologies, built for high-performance applications at any scale. The .NET Aspire Azure AI Search Documents integration enables you to connect to Azure AI Search services from your .NET applications.

Reviewer: That first sentence is full of jargon. I suggest starting with the simpler statement, then clarifying with the jargon.

```suggestion
The .NET Aspire Azure AI Search Documents integration enables you to connect to [Azure AI Search](/azure/search/search-what-is-azure-search) (formerly Azure Cognitive Search) services from your .NET applications. Azure AI Search is an enterprise-ready information retrieval system for your heterogeneous content that you ingest into a search index, and surface to users through queries and apps. It comes with a comprehensive set of advanced search technologies, built for high-performance applications at any scale.
```

### [.NET CLI](#tab/dotnet-cli)

```dotnetcli
dotnet add package Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Search
```

### [PackageReference](#tab/package-reference)

```xml
<PackageReference Include="Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Search"
                  Version="*" />
```

---

For more information, see [dotnet add package](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-add-package) or [Manage package dependencies in .NET applications](/dotnet/core/tools/dependencies).

### Add an Azure AI Search resource

To add an <xref:Aspire.Hosting.Azure.AzureSearchResource> to your app host project, call the <xref:Aspire.Hosting.AzureSearchExtensions.AddAzureSearch*> method providing a name:

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var search = builder.AddAzureSearch("search");

builder.AddProject<Projects.MyService>()
       .WithReference(search);

// After adding all resources, run the app...
```

> When you add an Azure AI Search resource to the app host, it exposes other useful APIs to express explicit provisioning configuration. The preceding code adds an Azure AI Search resource named `search` to the app host project. The <xref:Aspire.Hosting.ResourceBuilderExtensions.WithReference*> method passes the connection information to the `MyService` project.

Reviewer 2: The sentence

> When you add an Azure AI Search resource to the app host, it exposes other useful APIs to express explicit provisioning configuration.

feels like it isn't in the right place.

Author: You're right - removing it.

builder.AddProject<Projects.ExampleProject>()
       .WithReference(search);

// After adding all resources, run the app...
```

[!INCLUDE [connection-strings-alert](../includes/connection-strings-alert.md)]

The connection string is configured in the app host's configuration, typically under User Secrets, under the `ConnectionStrings` section:

```json
{
  "ConnectionStrings": {
    "search": "https://{account_name}.search.azure.com/"
  }
}
```

For more information, see [Add existing Azure resources with connection strings](../azure/integrations-overview.md#add-existing-azure-resources-with-connection-strings).

### Conditional configuration based on execution mode

If you want to use Azure AI Search when publishing to Azure but use a connection string during local development, you can use the `ExecutionContext.IsPublishMode` property:

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var search = builder.ExecutionContext.IsPublishMode
    ? builder.AddAzureSearch("search")
    : builder.AddConnectionString("search");

var myService = builder.AddProject<Projects.MyService>()
                       .WithReference(search);

> // After adding all resources, run the app...

Reviewer 2: Isn't this a duplicate of the above "Alternatively, instead of representing an Azure AI Search resource, you can add a connection string to the app host." part?

Author: Yes, good catch. Removing that.

### Configuration

The .NET Aspire Azure AI Search Documents library provides multiple options to configure the Azure AI Search connection based on the requirements and conventions of your project. Either an `Endpoint` or a `ConnectionString` is required to be supplied.

#### Use a connection string

A connection can be constructed from the **Keys and Endpoint** tab with the format `Endpoint={endpoint};Key={key};`. You can provide the name of the connection string when calling `builder.AddAzureSearchClient()`:

```csharp
builder.AddAzureSearchClient("searchConnectionName");
```

The connection string is retrieved from the `ConnectionStrings` configuration section. Two connection formats are supported:

##### Account endpoint

The recommended approach is to use an `Endpoint`, which works with the `AzureSearchSettings.Credential` property to establish a connection. If no credential is configured, the <xref:Azure.Identity.DefaultAzureCredential> is used.

```json
{
  "ConnectionStrings": {
    "search": "https://{search_service}.search.windows.net/"
  }
}
```

##### Connection string

> Alternatively, a custom connection string can be used:

Reviewer: nit: If this is the non-recommended approach, it might be good to say something brief about how the other one is more secure or something.

> Alternatively, a custom connection string can be used:

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, a connection string with key can be used, however; it's not the recommended approach:
```
